Come, FriarFrancis, be brief;
only to the plainform of marriage,
and you shall recount theirparticular duties afterwards.
You come hither, mylord, to marry this lady.
No.
To be marriedto her: friar,
you come to marry her.
Lady, you come hither tobe married to this count.
I do.
If either of you knowany inward impediment
why you should not beconjoined, charge you,
on your souls,to utter it.
Know you any, Hero?
None, my lord.
Know you any, count?
I dare make hisanswer, none.
O, what men dare do!
what men may do!
what men daily do, notknowing what they do!
How now!
interjections?
Why, then, somebe of laughing,
Stand thee by, friar.
Father, by your leave:
Will you with free andunconstrained soul
Give me this maid,your daughter?
As freely, son, asGod did give her me.
And what have I togive you back,
whose worth May counterpoisethis rich and precious gift?
Nothing, unless yourender her again.
Sweet prince, you learnme noble thankfulness.
There, Leonato, takeher back again:
Give not this rottenorange to your friend;
She's but the sign andsemblance of her honour.
Behold how like amaid she blushes here!
O, what authorityand show of truth
Can cunning sin coveritself withal!
Comes not that bloodas modest evidence
To witness simple virtue?
Would you not swear,All you that see her,
that she were a maid,By these exterior shows?
But she is none: She knowsthe heat of a luxurious bed;
Her blush is guiltiness,not modesty.
What do you mean, my lord?
Not to be married, Not to knitmy soul to an approved wanton.
Dear my lord, ifyou, in your own proof,
Have vanquish'd theresistance of her youth,
And made defeatof her virginity,
- I know what you wouldsay: if I have known her,
You will say she didembrace me as a husband,
And so extenuatethe 'forehand sin:
No, Leonato, I never temptedher with word too large;
But, as abrother to his sister,
show'd Bashfulsincerity and comely love.
And seem'd I everotherwise to you?
Out on thee! Seeming!
I will write against it:
You seem to me asDian in her orb,
As chaste as is thebud ere it be blown;
But you are moreintemperate in your blood
Than Venus, or thosepamper'd animals
That rage in savage sensuality.
Is my lord well, thathe doth speak so wide?
Sweet prince,why speak not you?
What should I speak?
I stand dishonour'd,that have gone about
To link my dear friendto a common stale.
Are these thingsspoken, or do I but dream?
Sir, they are spoken,and these things are true.
This looks notlike a nuptial.
True!
O God!
Leonato, stand I here?
Is this the prince?
is this theprince's brother?
Is this face Hero's?
are our eyes our own?
All this is so: butwhat of this, my lord?
Let me but move onequestion to your daughter;
And, by that fatherlyand kindly power
That you have in her,bid her answer truly.
I charge thee do so,as thou art my child.
O, God defend me!
how am I beset!
What kind ofcatechising call you this?
To make you answertruly to your name.
Is it not Hero?
Who can blot that nameWith any just reproach?
Marry, that can Hero;
Hero itself can blotout Hero's virtue.
What man was he talk'dwith you yesternight
Out at your windowbetwixt twelve and one?
Now, if you are amaid, answer to this.
I talk'd with no man atthat hour, my lord.
Why, then areyou no maiden.
Leonato, I am sorry you musthear: upon mine honour,
Myself, my brother andthis grieved count
Did see her, hear her,at that hour last night
Talk with a ruffian ather chamber-window
Who hath indeed, mostlike a liberal villain,
Confess'd the vileencounters they have had
A thousand times in secret.
Fie, fie! they are notto be named, my lord,
Not to be spoke of; There is notchastity enough in language
Without offence to utter them.
Thus, pretty lady, I am sorryfor thy much misgovernment.
O Hero, what aHero hadst thou been,
If half thy outwardgraces had been placed
About thy thoughts andcounsels of thy heart!
But fare thee well,most foul, most fair!
farewell, Thou pure impietyand impious purity!
For thee I'll lock upall the gates of love,
And on my eyelidsshall conjecture hang,
To turn all beautyinto thoughts of harm,
And never shall itmore be gracious.
Hath no man's daggerhere a point for me?
Why, how now, cousin!
wherefore sink you down?
Come, let us go.
These things,come thus to light,
Smother her spirits up.
How doth the lady?
Dead, I think.
Help, uncle!
Hero!
why, Hero!
Uncle!
Signior Benedick!
Friar!
O Fate!
take not awaythy heavy hand.
Death is the fairestcover for her shame
That may be wish'd for.
How now, cousin Hero!
Have comfort, lady.
Dost thou look up?
Yea, whereforeshould she not?
Wherefore!
Why, doth not everyearthly thing
Cry shame upon her?
Could she here deny The storythat is printed in her blood?
Do not live, Hero; donot ope thine eyes:
For, did I think thouwouldst not quickly die,
Thought I thy spirits werestronger than thy shames,
Myself would, on therearward of reproaches,
Strike at thy life.
Grieved I, I had but one?
Chid I for that atfrugal nature's frame?
O, one too much by thee!
Why had I one?
Why ever wast thoulovely in my eyes?
Why had I not withcharitable hand
Took up a beggar'sissue at my gates,
Who smirch'd thusand mired with infamy,
I might have said 'Nopart of it is mine;
This shame derives itselffrom unknown loins'?
But mine and mine I lovedand mine I praised
And mine that I wasproud on, mine so much
That I myself was to myselfnot mine, Valuing of her,
-why, she, O, she isfallen Into a pit of ink,
that the wide sea Hath drops toofew to wash her clean again
And salt too littlewhich may season give
To her foul-tainted flesh!
Sir, sir, be patient.
For my part, I am soattired in wonder,
I know not what to say.
O, on my soul, mycousin is belied!
Lady, were you herbedfellow last night?
No, truly not; although,until last night,
I have this twelvemonthbeen her bedfellow.
Confirm'd, confirm'd!
O, that is stronger madeWhich was before barr'd up
with ribs of iron!
Would the two princeslie, and Claudio lie,
Who loved her so, that,speaking of her foulness,
Wash'd it with tears?
Hence from her!
let her die.
Hear me a little; For I haveonly been silent so long
And given way unto thiscourse of fortune.
By noting of thelady I have mark'd
A thousand blushing apparitionsTo start into her face,
a thousand innocent shamesIn angel whiteness
beat away those blushes;
And in her eye therehath appear'd a fire,
To burn the errors thatthese princes hold
Against her maiden truth.
Call me a fool; Trust not myreading nor my observations,
Which with experimentalseal doth warrant
The tenor of my book;
trust not my age,
My reverence, calling,nor divinity,
If this sweet lady lienot guiltless here
Under some biting error.
Friar, it cannot be.
Thou seest that all thegrace that she hath left
Is that she will notadd to her damnation
A sin of perjury;she not denies it:
Why seek'st thou thento cover with excuse
That which appears inproper nakedness?
Lady, what man is heyou are accused of?
They know thatdo accuse me;
I know none: If I knowmore of any man alive
Than that which maidenmodesty doth warrant,
Let all mysins lack mercy!
O my father, Prove you thatany man with me conversed
At hours unmeet, orthat I yesternight
Maintain'd the change ofwords with any creature,
Refuse me, hate me,torture me to death!
There is some strangemisprision in the princes.
Two of them have thevery bent of honour;
And if their wisdomsbe misled in this,
The practise of itlives in John the bastard,
Whose spirits toil inframe of villanies.
I know not.
If they speakbut truth of her,
These handsshall tear her;
if they wrong her honour,
The proudest of themshall well hear of it.
Time hath not yet sodried this blood of mine,
Nor age so eatup my invention,
Nor fortune madesuch havoc of my means,
Nor my bad life reftme so much of friends,
But they shall find,awaked in such a kind,
Both strength of limband policy of mind,
Ability in means andchoice of friends,
To quit me ofthem throughly.
Pause awhile, And let mycounsel sway you in this case.
Your daughter here theprinces left for dead:
Let her awhile besecretly kept in,
And publish it thatshe is dead indeed;
Maintain a mourning ostentation
And on your family'sold monument
Hang mournful epitaphsand do all rites
That appertain unto a burial.
What shall become ofthis? what will this do?
Marry, this well carriedshall on her behalf
Change slander to remorse;that is some good:
But not for that dream Ion this strange course,
But on this travaillook for greater birth.
She dying, as itmust so be maintain'd,
Upon the instantthat she was accused,
Shall be lamented,pitied and excused
Of every hearer: forit so falls out
That what we have weprize not to the worth
Whiles we enjoy it, butbeing lack'd and lost,
Why, then we rack thevalue, then we find
The virtue that possessionwould not show us
Whiles it was ours.
So will it fare with Claudio:
When he shall hear shedied upon his words,
The idea of her life
shall sweetly creep Intohis study of imagination,
And every lovelyorgan of her life
Shall come apparell'd inmore precious habit,
More moving-delicateand full of life,
Into the eye andprospect of his soul,
Than when shelived indeed;
then shall he mourn, If everlove had interest in his liver,
And wish he had notso accused her,
No, though he thoughthis accusation true.
Let this be so, anddoubt not but success
Will fashion the eventin better shape
Than I can lay itdown in likelihood.
But if all aim butthis be levell'd false,
The supposition ofthe lady's death
Will quench the wonderof her infamy:
And if it sort not well,
you may conceal her, As bestbefits her wounded reputation,
In some reclusiveand religious life,
Out of all eyes, tongues,minds and injuries.
Signior Leonato, letthe friar advise you:
And though you knowmy inwardness
and love Is very much untothe prince and Claudio,
Yet, by mine honour,I will deal in this
As secretly and justly as yoursoul Should with your body.
Being that Iflow in grief,
The smallesttwine may lead me.
'Tis wellconsented: presently away;
For to strange sores strangelythey strain the cure.
Come, lady, die tolive: this wedding-day
Perhaps is but prolong'd:have patience and endure.
Lady Beatrice, haveyou wept all this while?
Yea, and I willweep a while longer.
I will not desire that.
You have noreason; I do it freely.
Surely I do believe yourfair cousin is wronged.
Ah, how much might theman deserve of me
that would right her!
Is there any way toshow such friendship?
A very even way,but no such friend.
May a man do it?
It is a man'soffice, but not yours.
I do love nothing in theworld so well as you:
is not that strange?
As strange as thething I know not.
It were as possiblefor me to say
I loved nothing so well asyou: but believe me not;
and yet I lie not;I confess nothing,
nor I deny nothing.
I am sorry for my cousin.
By my sword,Beatrice, thou lovest me.
Do not swear, and eat it.
I will swear by itthat you love me;
and I will make him eat itthat says I love not you.
Will you noteat your word?
With no sauce thatcan be devised to it.
I protest I love thee.
Why, then, God forgive me!
What offence,sweet Beatrice?
You have stayed mein a happy hour:
I was about toprotest I loved you.
And do it withall thy heart.
I love you with somuch of my heart
that none is leftto protest.
Come, bid me doany thing for thee.
Kill Claudio.
Ha!
not for the wide world.
You kill me to deny it.
Farewell.
Tarry, sweet Beatrice.
I am gone, though I am here:there is no love in you:
nay, I pray you, let me go.
Beatrice,-- Infaith, I will go.
We'll be friends first.
You dare easier be friends withme than fight with mine enemy.
Is Claudio thine enemy?
Is he not approved inthe height a villain,
that hathslandered, scorned,
dishonoured my kinswoman?
O that I were a man!
What, bear her in hand untilthey come to take hands;
and then, withpublic accusation,
uncovered slander,unmitigated rancour,
--O God, thatI were a man!
I would eat his heartin the market-place.
Hear me, Beatrice,--
Talk with a manout at a window!
A proper saying!
Nay, but,Beatrice,-- Sweet Hero!
She is wronged,she is slandered,
she is undone.
Beat--
Princes and counties!
Surely, aprincely testimony,
a goodly count,Count Comfect;
a sweet gallant, surely!
O that I were aman for his sake!
or that I had any friendwould be a man for my sake!
But manhood ismelted into courtesies,
valour into compliment, and menare only turned into tongue,
and trim ones too:
he is now as valiantas Hercules
that only tells alie and swears it.
I cannot be aman with wishing,
therefore I will die awoman with grieving.
Tarry, good Beatrice.
By this hand, I love thee.
Use it for my love some otherway than swearing by it.
Think you in your soul the CountClaudio hath wronged Hero?
Yea, as sure as I havea thought or a soul.
Enough, I am engaged;I will challenge him.
I will kiss yourhand, and so I leave you.
By this hand, Claudio shallrender me a dear account.
As you hear ofme, so think of me.
Go, comfort your cousin:I must say she is dead:
and so, farewell.
Is our wholedissembly appeared?
O, a stool and acushion for the sexton.
Which be the malefactors?
Marry, that am Iand my partner.
Nay, that's certain; we havethe exhibition to examine.
But which are the offendersthat are to be examined?
let them comebefore master constable.
Yea, marry, letthem come before me.
What is your name, friend?
Borachio.
Pray, writedown, Borachio.
Yours, sirrah?
I am a gentleman, sir,and my name is Conrade.
Write down, mastergentleman Conrade.
Masters, do you serve God?
Yea, sir, we hope.
Write down, that theyhope they serve God:
and write God first;
for God forbid but God shouldgo before such villains!
Masters, it is proved already
that you are little betterthan false knaves;
and it will go near tobe thought so shortly.
How answer youfor yourselves?
Marry, sir, wesay we are none.
A marvellous wittyfellow, I assure you:
but I will go about with him.
Come you, sirrah;a word in your ear: sir,
I say to you, it is thoughtyou are false knaves.
Sir, I say toyou we are none.
Well, stand aside.
'Fore God, theyare both in a tale.
Have you writ down,that they are none?
Master constable, you gonot the way to examine:
you must call forth the watchthat are their accusers.
Yea, marry,that's the eftest way.
Let the watch come forth.
Masters, I charge you,in the prince's name,
accuse these men.
This man said,sir, that Don John,
the prince'sbrother, was a villain.
Write down PrinceJohn a villain.
Why, this is flat perjury,
to call a prince'sbrother villain.
Master constable,--
Pray thee, fellow, peace:
I do not like thylook, I promise thee.
What heard youhim say else?
Marry, that he hadreceived a thousand ducats
of Don John for accusingthe Lady Hero wrongfully.
Flat burglary asever was committed.
Yea, by mass, that it is.
What else, fellow?
And that CountClaudio did mean,
upon his words, to disgrace Herobefore the whole assembly.
and not marry her.
O villain! thouwilt be condemned
into everlastingredemption for this.
What else?
This is all.
And this is more, masters,than you can deny.
Prince John is this morningsecretly stolen away;
Hero was in thismanner accused,
in this verymanner refused,
and upon the grief ofthis suddenly died.
Master constable, letthese men be bound,
and brought to Leonato's:I will go before
and show him theirexamination.
Come, let thembe opinioned.
Let them be in the hands--
Off, coxcomb!
God's my life,where's the sexton?
let him write down theprince's officer coxcomb.
Bind them.
Thou naughty varlet!
Away! you are an ass,you are an ass.
Dost thou notsuspect my place?
dost thou notsuspect my years?
O that he were here towrite me down an ass!
But, masters,remember that I am an ass;
though it benot written down,
yet forget notthat I am an ass.
No, thou villain,thou art full of piety,
as shall be proved uponthee by good witness.
I am a wise fellow,and, which is more,
an officer, and,which is more,
a householder,and, which is more,
as pretty a piece of fleshas any is in Messina,
and one that knowsthe law, go to;
and a rich fellowenough, go to;
and a fellow thathath had losses,
and one that hathtwo gowns
and every thinghandsome about him.
Bring him away.
O that I had beenwrit down an ass!